---
title: "Cooking and Craft"
layout: post
---

There is a growing trend to portray the act of cooking as an art. Food journalism is increasingly focused on the appearance of food, photographing our food is the norm and the newest cookbooks look more like coffee table art books more than collections of recipes. Eating engages most—usually and hopefully all—of our senses and thus is a necessarily aesthetic experience. As cooking continues to evolve and develop it follows that we would want to maximize the effect cooking has on our senses and expand the pleasure of eating. But do we lose something when we prioritize the pleasure of eating? Is it possible we're distancing ourselves from a simpler joy of cooking?

My father told me many times when I was young that food didn’t always have to taste good, it just had to provide energy. As a physicist he viewed food as a mechanical input. It wasn’t until later in his life that he changed his views and learned the joys of crafting his own food, eventually growing into an excellent baker and a skillful cook. My parent’s insistence that food was nourishment first and a pleasurable activity second was what led me to explore cooking as a way of making food enjoyable. But their claim wasn't wholly mistaken. There are very few things we do more regularly than eat. In our lives almost no day goes by without us consuming food of some kind. Preparing food must be done multiple times a day, day after day after day. It is only with modern technologies and affluence that many of us are released from the necessity of spending a large percentage of our day in the act of food preparation. However, it appears that freeing ourselves from the labors of food preparation is connected with an increase in diet related health issues—when we all have freezers and microwaves we tend to eat a lot more processed frozen food. Furthermore, dining out distances and disconnects us from the technical skills and planning required by daily preparation of meals and extends the notion that cooking is a an activity done by others, outside the home.

Feeding ourselves is a necessarily demanding activity. Finding and consuming food is the main activity of most living species on this planet. Many organisms never cease feeding. I'd like to avoid making an appeal to nature but I think it's important to ask ourselves why we attempt to minimize the amount of time spent preparing food. Many of us simply feel we don't have time to spend cooking meals—though we can spend [three hours](http://www.bls.gov/news.release/atus.nr0.htm) watching TV. We work hard right up until it's time to relax and increasingly even then we [continue to work](http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2013/11/hyperemployment-or-the-exhausting-work-of-the-technology-user/281149/) a bit. Spending an hour and half after work just to do more work  in kitchen is a terribly unappealing idea to most people. But again I ask, why do we feel that time in the kitchen is not enjoyable labor?

Good craftsmanship is not something one learns quickly, nor does one reach a point where they have learned a craft in it’s entirety—it is a necessarily open ended and endless pursuit. Much of the joy derived from a craft is contained in the act of crafting—the work is part of the meaning. This is contrasted against a majority of artworks where the piece itself a singular object—it’s value contained wholly in the piece of art. While the juxtaposition I presented has many exceptions, the point I want to make is that when we disconnect ourselves from enjoying the process of cooking we prioritize *dining* while simultaneously casting *cooking* into the sphere of chores and “work” which engenders an avoidant relationship with food preparation. Ultimately we we seek simplify cooking and find [shortcuts to nourishment](http://www.soylent.me/). 

Technocentric postindustrial society portrays "unnecessary" labor as having negative value, something to avoid and something from which we can isolate ourselves with inventions. At least this is what we as consumers are led to feel—"there are solutions to our needs!" But it is misguided to believe that sustaining human life does not require a massive amount of human effort (though probably [not as much](http://www.zpub.com/notes/idle.html) as we want to believe). Society generally expects us to maximize pleasure and minimize labor. The craftsperson however does not view these concepts as mutually exclusive. The only evidence I have of this is my own experience and the anecdotes of friends' experiences with crafts. To me, quality craftsmanship is impossible without deriving pleasure from the labor.

If there is one character trait shared by all the restaurant chefs I've worked under it is a love of labor. It's simultaneously encouraging and discouraging when you're working seventy hours a week and your chef is in the kitchen before you arrive and still working after you leave. Michelin-starred and other "accomplished" chefs are typically over thirty years of age. What we should understand here is that chefs work *hard* at cooking—it is not something they are naturally good at. Each ingredient has it's own unique properties and it is through experience that we learn how to work with them. Each technique has it's own nuances and limitations. Through experimentation and application we learn how to take command of those techniques and apply them to ingredients. Familiarity and experience with dishes, techniques and ingredients is what expands our flexibility and creativity in the kitchen.

Portraying cooking primarily as an artistic act devalues the importance of experience, experimentation and work necessary to cook well—it portrays skill in the kitchen as an innate skill, one that cannot be learned through practice and work. When we believe that cooking well is out of our reach and that our time spent in the kitchen is not constructive to our overall skill, the pleasure of the work is taken from us. Using the framework of craft we can better appreciate the labor that cooking in the home demands and hopefully better enjoy a necessary part of human life.
