---
title: "Towards a Better Culinary Ethos"
layout: post
bibliography: /Users/evanlivingston/Desktop/GMO/GMO.bib

---

The fight over GMO acceptance is a blundering debate which has been brought into the forefront of news as a result of growing consumer awareness and concern regarding our food supply. The "informed" consumer is led to believe that genetically modified foods are something to be avoided. It's an assertion made both in marketing and food journalism. There exist different argumentative systems which contextualize the GMO debate and often fail to address alternative frameworks of understanding. The two main sides of the GMO debate can be interpreted as representing more latent ideologies. The anti-gmo framework most often relies on appeals to emotions, lacks strong scientific evidence and fail to acknowledge the potential of GMOs to address a number of agricultural challenges. Alternatively, pro-GMO frameworks fail to identify the connection of GMOs to an industrial supply chain which is dominated by interest on wealth accumulation and continues to be dismissive of both human and environmental health. I argue that the GMO debate is part of a larger but obscured argument concerning our culinary ethos and cultural ideals. 

### A bit of history and a dose of science

The distinction between between GMO and non-GMO is an elusive and problematic division. What does it mean for an organism to be genetically modified? The engine of evolution is fueled by genetic modification to organisms. Mutagenesis, the process whereby stable changes are introduced into an organism's genes, has been occurring since the first single celled organisms appeared on earth. Furthermore, genetic modification of an organism caused by interference from a different species than the one being modified is not unique to the last fifty years nor is it uniquely caused by humans.

The history of agriculture is largely the domestication of wild plants. Wild plants are understood as phenotypes and genotypes that exist independent of human intervention and domestication is understood as the creating of a morphology, through human intervention, that better serves human purposes. The domestication of plants typically involves altering the plant in a way that makes it less suitable to exist in the wild. Some examples of this are inhibiting seed dispersal, eradication of the protective seed dormancy period and diminished chemical and mechanical defenses. Agriculture as a whole represents the most focused effort of intentional genetic modification [@Gepts]. Nearly all of our domesticated plants are radically different than their wild progenitors and a major part of their domestication has done away with their ability to survive without human intervention. The type of relationship between domesticated plants and humans is a symbiotic one.

David Rindos has some [fascinating research](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2742515) that shows symbiotic relationships between humans and plants existed long before the rise of agriculture. Furthermore, non-human symbiotic relationships which shape the genotype of an organism have been occurring for an astoundingly long time. So long in fact that Rindos uses the term "coevolution" to indicate that the genotype of both species is shaped by the the relationship. Our understanding of the term GMO is challenged even more by the fact that the horizontal gene transfer (HGT) technique used is laboratories for creating transgenic organisms is not unique to laboratory operations — HGT is prevalent among single celled organisms and there are even examples of HGT from single celled organisms into complex organisms such as the potato plan[@Kyndt2015]. Even more astounding; a significant number of the genes that make up the human genome resulted from horizontal gene transfers from organisms such as fungus and bacteria [@Crisp2015].


Genetic modification is a description that avoids specificity. It is misleading because it draws "focus on the process, rather than the product, of the technology, they obstruct the potential to subdivide and conceptually expand the categories of products derived through gene technology–based breeding" [@Nielsen2003]. The term *transgenic* is slightly more accurate when discussing the techno-scientific work being done in the past 50 years but it's important to note that this term still represents a broad spectrum of organisms and is not linked to a specific agricultural agenda. For the sake of this discussion we will use the term transgenic to denote what are typically referred to as GM foods in the the GMO debate. It is also important to note here that there are techniques for biological engineering other than genetic modification used for producing organisms that would not exist independent of human intervention such as wide crosses, embryo rescue, protoplast fusion and colchicine polyploidy.
 
There is extensive research on the safety of transgenes as well as the ability of transgenic crops to achieve the supposed benefits put forth my GMO proponents such as reduced need for pesticides, higher yields and glyphosate resistance. It is beyond the scope of this piece to comprehensively discuss the research findings on transgenic safety and performance but we will briefly review the current science. There are some excellent summaries of current research listed in the references section if the reader wants to learn more. 

The leading argument in favor of the the proliferation of transgenic plants is the need for increased food production. A significant part of the world is made up of less than perfect agricultural land [@Muir2010]. Capitalizing on that land and reducing the yield gap is essential to the problem of feeding the world's expanding population. Not only can transgenic plants supposedly augment crop yields, those crops can be adjusted to better fulfill the nutritional needs of humans, Golden Rice is an one example of a nutrient-augmented crop. The issue of increased crop yield is still debated; there is research pointing to both an increase in yields and research showing what gains have been made are eventually lost as the crop matures [@Garcia2005],[@Klumper2014]. There is a lack of evidence to draw conclusions about how well nutritionally enriched crops have reduced issues of nutrition.

One critique against transgenic development is that possibility of inadvertently introducing extra genes during the engineering process. This concern is captured in the melodramatic term "frankenfoods". The common line of reasoning here is that a unknown gene might be accidentally introduced during the engineering process (linkage drag) that alters the plant in unexpected ways, either contributing to uncontrollable proliferation or some other scary and unforeseen outcome. However, research shows that classical breeding is also susceptible to linkage drag. Furthermore, as genetic engineering advances the benefits over classical breeding grow larger because there is an increased awareness of each genes and their surrounding regions in the DNA as well as the ability to better isolate which genes are transferred [@Gepts2002]. There is critique of this optimistic view claiming that genetic reductionism misunderstands how genes function as a whole once we understand "their individual parts" [@McAfee2003].

GMO critiques frequently express concern over issues of genetic diversity and GM crops. However, plant domestication itself represents a threat to genetic diversity. Despite the critique that genetic modification reduces diversity, genetic modification typically *increases* diversity because it introduces new genes whereas classical breeding typically suppresses existing genes in organisms. 

Paul Gepts summarizes the scientific state of genetic engineering:

> An analysis of existing data shows that genetic changes induced by domestication are generally not comparable with those currently brought about by GE in that they represent a loss of function, in contrast with the gain of function associated with genes introduced by GE (at least for most current applications). In addition, GE is not necessarily a faster and more precise alternative to classical plant breeding. It is principally a powerful and useful way of generating additional genetic diversity that can then be incorporated into improved crop cultivars by the proven methods and techniques of plant breeding. The potential benefits of GE should be investigated on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the advantages or disadvantages of alternative technologies. The existing regulations in place for GE cultivars may have to be extended to cultivars obtained by classical plant breeding. Where uncertainties exist, experiments specially designed to investigate these uncertainties should be conducted rather than relying on existing data that are sometimes only peripherally relevant. Who should conduct these experiments (private or public sector) and the current U.S. regulatory framework divided over three agencies (EPA, USDA, and FDA) remain bones of contention. Finally, it is also clear that GE is—at this stage a relatively unsophisticated technology, severely limited by the paucity of economically useful genes available for transformation. Further advances will increase the precision of the technique, its relevance to consumers, and its environmental friendliness. It is likely that technological advances will increase the precision of insertion in the genome and expression of transgenes. Potential solutions to some of these problems are being developed.
> 

The safety of transgenic crops continues to be researched and debated but the general scientific consensus is that transgenic crops pose no threats to humans or the environment which are greater than the threats of classically bred plants. In many cases transgenes offer some kind of benefit such as pest resistance or tolerance to disease. What transgenes have been unable to achieve is social consensus. 

### A larger debate

Critiques of GM foods extend beyond health and safety. Biotech is increasingly used to extend the interests of multinational businesses and reinforce both the political and economic hegemony of the United States and other biotech leaders. Counter to what proponents of GMO's typically claim, GMO deregulation does not does not have a causal relationship to increased food security [@Rodriguez2014]. An analysis of the kinds of crops being engineered, primarily corn, soybeans and cotton, clearly shows global hunger and nutrition are not an industry priority. Instead, transgenic crops represent a way of concentrating power and controlling the means of production and distribution across the global agricultural supply chain.


In 2002 multiple nations in Africa were dealing with issues of food scarcity. Relief was offered in the form of un-milled GM grain from the United States. A number of countries rejected the offer citing concerns related to genetic modification or asked for alternatives, namely, either receiving the grain in milled form or receiving quantities of the available non-GM grain. Noah Zerbe summarizes the events:

> But the United States failed to anticipate the strength of African opposition to GM food aid. By demanding that US food aid be milled before distribution, African governments were not simply giving into misguided European fears over agricultural biotechnology. Rather, they were attempting to secure their long-term economic viability of their agricultural sectors. Unable to compete directly against American and European farmers who are heavily subsidized and protected by their governments, African farmers were responding to European demands for non-GM agriculture through specialized production. The importation of GM seed would have undermined their capacity to engage in such specialized production, cutting off an important source of foreign exchange, particularly for Zambia and Zimbabwe. By failing to recognize the importance of non-GM production for the future health and vitality of the economies of Southern Africa, and by demanding that countries accept US food aid unconditionally in an effort to promote its own foreign policy and commercial objectives, the US policy exacerbated the food crisis. What should have been a routine food relief operation became a highly charged debate over the future of agricultural biotechnology not just in Africa but around the world. [@Zerbe2004]
>

Some proponents of transgenic crops are aware of issues of agricultural sovereignty, intellectual property rights related to ownership of modified plants and prohibitive costs of entry into GMO markets. Occasionally these proponents point to Golden Rice as a success story of transgenic crop development and GMO accessibility. However, these pro-GMO discussions take place "without raising troublesome questions about why so many people have lost their traditional sources of vitamin A, or why we might expect 'golden rice' to reach those who need it when other food sources of beta carotene or inexpensive vitamin-A supplements do not" [@McAfee2003]. 

There is a divisive and idealogical debate which undergirds the GMO debate. The debate is not just about science and safety — it is also a discussion of ethics, ideals and sovereignty. Scientific research has a role in formulating cultural ideals, but it alone does not determine the ethos. Currently, an ethos of technological determinism and neoliberal progress dominates the global food supply chain. @Bonneuil2007 point out how scientists have attempted to limit public discourse of GMOs and frame the debate as one fundamentally concerning environmental and health risks. In France it was only after direct action against research enterprises that public discourse around GMOs began to reframe the questions surrounding the debate frome "Are GMOs dangerous to consumers or to the environment? as: Are GMOs instruments of agrochemical oligopolies domination over small farmers?, Do they lead to the commodification of life?, What kind of agriculture and food do we want?." [@Bonneuil2007]  

Technological determinism promises that the present system's problems can and will be solved by further techno-scientific advances and by increasing a vague and general "efficiency" of the system. Rarely do we seek non-technical solutions to the problems of civilization. Rather than directly addressing unfettered population growth (minimize our reproduction), we engineer a world that can support more people. Where we could consume less meat, we instead develop meat grown in laboratories. Instead of enjoying tomatoes only in the summer, we construct elaborate production systems and transgenic plants so that we might enjoys fresh tomatoes on Christmas eve. While these solutions in isolation are not the apex of ethical concern, their application and the way in which they feedback into the zeitgeist demands scrutiny and reflection. 

In her essay ["A Plea for Culinary Modernism"](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/05/slow-food-artisanal-natural-preservatives/) Rachel Laudan highlights the utility of the industrialized food system and at the same time begs us to formulate a culinary ethos, one which is opposed to Luddism. Laudan makes the mistake of not recognizing an existing ethos, an ethos of utility shaped by late capitalism. She also fails to understand Luddism as an ethos in opposition to the development of late capitalism. Culinary Luddites, to borrow her term, are attempting to make a stand against a techno-scientific configuration of the global food supply, to critique a purely utilitarian and capitalistic ethos. Whether alternative configurations can adequately and safely provide food for all people is an unknown, just as it's an unknown if modern industrial agriculture can supply the same things. 

The categorical acceptance of the modern agricultural system without ongoing and fundamental scrutiny is the forfeiture of agency in constructing a culinary ethos and the shaping of an ethical space. Submitting our discursive influence to the framework of techno-science, by accepting its ideals as our own we sacrifice the primacy of ethics as a guiding principle in our global food supply, a system that is broken. If it wasn't people wouldn't be dying of hunger. While I don't want to underestimate the logistics of feeding every human it's important that we don't overestimate it either. It *is* a difficult problem — as long as we have other priorities. 

The GMO debate must necessarily move beyond a debate centered around scientific efficacy — Not so one side of the debate is able to establish dominance but so that all sides more appropriately address the issues centered around and stemming from bioengineering. Often scientists and engineers themselves seek to maintain control of public discourses by strictly centering discussions on scientific issues of which they themselves are the only experts. But the GMO debate is not just a debate of scientific consensus. The dominating ethos of techno-science alone cannot address issues of exploitation, inequality and oppression. It is unable to provide a comprehensive rubric for assessing problems present in the global food supply nor is assessing these problems one of its goals. The structural and societal changes effected by engineers and the elite group of people who promote their work financially and legislatively are felt across society and as such discourses and legislation ought to represent the broadest spectrum of interest groups, not industry alone. 

***  
### References


