---
title: "Cooking and Craft"
layout: post
---

There is a growing trend to portray the act of cooking as art. Food journalism is increasingly focused on the appearance of food, photographing our food is the norm and the newest cookbooks look more like coffee table art books more than books of recipes. Eating engages most, if not all, of our senses and thus is a necessarily aesthetic experience. As cooking continues to evolve and develop it follows that we would want to maximize the effect cooking has on our senses and expand the pleasure of eating. But do we lose something when we prioritize the pleasure of eating, is it possible we're distancing ourselves from a simpler joy of cooking?

My father told me many times when I was young that food didn’t always have to taste good, it just had to provide energy. As a physicist he viewed food as a mechanical input. It wasn’t until later in his life that he learned the joys of crafting his own food. He eventually became an excellent baker and a skillful cook. My parent’s insistence that food was nourishment first and a pleasurable activity second was what led me to explore cooking as a way of making food enjoyable. But their claim isn’t wholly mistaken. There are very few things we do more regularly than eat. In our lives almost no day goes by without us consuming food of some kind. Preparing food must be done multiple times a day, day after day after day. It is only with modern technologies and affluence that many of us are released from the necessity of spending a large percentage of our day in the act of food preparation. However, it appears that freeing ourselves from the labors of food preparation is connected with an increase in diet related health issues—when we all have freezers and microwaves we tend to eat a lot more processed frozen food. Furthermore, as we distance ourselves from the daily preparation of food dining is able to take on 

Feeding ourselves is a necessarily demanding activity. Finding and consuming food is the main activity of most living species on this planet. Many organisms never cease feeding. I'd like to avoid making an appeal to nature but I think it's important to ask ourselves why we attempt to minimize the amount of time spent preparing food. Many of us simply feel we don't have time to spend cooking meals—though we can spend three hours watching TV. We work hard right up until it's time to relax and increasingly even then we continue to work a bit. Spending and hour and half after work just to work hard in kitchen is a terribly unappealing idea to most people. But again I ask, why do we feel that time in the kitchen is unenjoyable labor?

Good craftsmanship is not something one learns quickly, nor does one reach a point where they have learned a craft in it’s entirety—it is a necessarily open ended and endless pursuit. Much of the joy derived from a craft is contained in the act of crafting. This is contrasted against a majority of artworks where the piece itself a singular object—it’s value contained wholly in the piece of art. While the juxtaposition I presented has many exceptions, the point I want to make is that when we disconnect ourselves from enjoying the process of cooking we prioritize dining while simultaneously casting cooking into the sphere of chores and “work” which leads us to attempt to simplify cooking and find shortcuts to nourishment. 

Technocentric postindustrial society portrays labor as having negative value, something to avoid and something from which we can isolate ourselves with inventions. At least this is what we as consumers are led to feel—there are solutions to our needs! But it is misguided to believe that sustaining human life does not require a massive amount of human effort (though probably not as much as we want to believe). Society generally expects us to maximize pleasure and minimize labour. The craftsperson however does not view these concepts as mutually exclusive. The only evidence I have of this is my own experience and the anecdotes of friends' experiences with crafts. To me, quality craftsmanship is impossible without deriving pleasure from the labor.
